

===== PAGE 1 =====
CommCP: Efficient Multi-Agent Coordination via LLM-Based
Communication with Conformal Prediction
Xiaopan Zhang∗, Zejin Wang∗, Zhixu Li, Jianpeng Yao, Jiachen Li‡
Abstract— To complete assignments provided by humans in
natural language, robots must interpret commands, generate
and answer relevant questions for scene understanding, and ma-
nipulate target objects. Real-world deployments often require
multiple heterogeneous robots with different manipulation ca-
pabilities to handle different assignments cooperatively. Beyond
the need for specialized manipulation skills, effective informa-
tion gathering is important in completing these assignments.
To address this component of the problem, we formalize the
information-gathering process in a fully cooperative setting as
an underexplored multi-agent multi-task Embodied Question
Answering (MM-EQA) problem, which is a novel extension
of canonical Embodied Question Answering (EQA), where
effective communication is crucial for coordinating efforts
without redundancy. To address this problem, we propose
CommCP, a novel LLM-based decentralized communication
framework designed for MM-EQA. Our framework employs
conformal prediction to calibrate the generated messages,
thereby minimizing receiver distractions and enhancing com-
munication reliability. To evaluate our framework, we intro-
duce an MM-EQA benchmark featuring diverse, photo-realistic
household scenarios with embodied questions. Experimental
results demonstrate that CommCP significantly enhances the
task success rate and exploration efficiency over baselines.
The experiment videos, code, and dataset are available on our
project website: https://comm-cp.github.io.
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern service robots are designed to understand human
instructions and complete tasks in real-world household
environments (e.g., “Turn off the TV if it is currently on,”
“Bring the red pillow from the living room to the bed-
room”). This process involves interpreting natural language
commands, generating and answering relevant questions for
scene understanding and reasoning (e.g., “Is the TV turned
on?” “What is the color of the pillow?”), and manipulating
target objects accordingly. A crucial step is answering these
questions, a task known as Embodied Question Answering
(EQA) [1], which requires robots to efficiently explore the
3D environment from a random starting location and actively
gather information until a confident answer can be provided.
Prior studies have investigated this in single-agent settings
[1]–[5]. In contrast, we envision future households with
multiple heterogeneous service robots, each with distinct
capabilities and non-transferable assignments. While they
cannot take over each other’s tasks, they can access all
generated questions and share observations and interpre-
tations to enhance exploration efficiency. We define this
∗Equal contribution
‡Corresponding author
X. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Li, J. Yao, and J. Li are with the Trustworthy
Autonomous Systems Laboratory at the University of California, Riverside,
CA, USA. {xzhan006, jiachen.li}@ucr.edu.
Robot 2
I see a mirror relevant to your 
target shampoo at {position1}.
position2
Time 0
Time 22
Time 3
position1
Where is the 
shampoo?
Robot 1
 I can answer the 
question now!
Could you tell me where the 
shampoo is most likely located?
I see bath products that may be 
your target at {position2}.
Fig. 1.
In a household setting, robots exchange observations and reasoning
to collaboratively complete their assigned tasks. Each agent generates
confident and goal-directed messages using calibrated outputs from LLMs.
The bottom-left image shows a bird’s-eye view of Robot 1’s navigation
path after incorporating information received from Robot 2. The top-right
sequence captures both robots’ camera views at different timestamps.
cooperative information-gathering setting as a multi-agent
multi-task EQA (MM-EQA) problem, a novel challenge that
facilitates multi-robot collaboration in real-world scenarios.
While existing single-agent EQA solutions can be adapted
to a multi-agent setting by having each robot work inde-
pendently, this naive approach is inefficient. Communica-
tion enables mutual assistance, improving exploration and
increasing the likelihood of faster task completion. How-
ever, uncalibrated communication could hinder efficiency by
sharing irrelevant or misleading information. Therefore, it is
critical to ensure that messages are accurate and pertine